# Statin

PHC 327 IAL&#x20;

Risk assessment of statin prescription

among patients with low risk of

cardiovascular events

Statin is a drug that inhibits HMG- CoA reductase which is a vital precursor in cholesterol biosynthesis. 1 Statin is statistically proven drug that effectively lowers Low-density lipoprotein

cholesterol concentration by inhibiting de novo synthesis of cholesterol in the liver and retrieving cholesterol from peripheral circulation systems. 1 Evidence from JUPITER trial, a large multinational long-term randomized clinical trial to test the effectiveness of statin therapy, showed that statin significantly decreased inflammatory biomarker hsCRP which can be used to predict vascular events. 2,3 Now, statin drugs are commonly prescribed for both primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular events, successfully proving its effectiveness against adverse cardiovascular diseases. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guideline and ACC/AHA guideline both state that patients who have a high risk of cardiovascular risk factor and the secondary cause are the candidate for statin therapy. 4,5 Despite its effectiveness, statin prescription among patients who are deemed to have a low risk of cardiovascular disease has been controversial, as the relationship between statin and aggravated diabetic status is in dispute (BMJ). Controversy regarding whether the cardiovascular benefits of statin outweighs diabetogenic side effect of the drug in low-risk atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease patient groups are shown through multiple study trials. According to JUPITER trial, although there was no increase in plasma glucose levels, increase in both HbA1c (5.9 versus 5.8, P = 0.001) and physician-reported diabetes (270 versus 216, P = 0.01) was observed in statin prescribed patient group (JUPITER). For participants with one or more major diabetes risk factor (metabolic syndrome, impaired fasting glucose, BMI above 30kg/m2, HbA1c > 6%) undergoing statin therapy, the primary endpoint of research (MI, stroke, admission to hospital for unstable angina, arterial revascularization, cardiovascular death), was reduced by 39% (p = 0.0001), venous thrombosis by 36% (p = 0.08), total mortality by 17%, but incident diabetes was increased by 28% (HR 1.28, 95% CI 1.07 - 1.54, p=0.01), combined with a increase in HBA1c. However, patients without major diabetes risk factors undergoing rosuvastatin only had a decrease in primary endpoint with no increase in incident diabetes. (Balancing the cardiometabolic benefits and risks of statins) Other studies show that there is a correlation between increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes and statin treatment,

especially at high doses. 6 Meta-analysis of 13 statin trials from 1994 to 2009 with 91,140 participants was conducted with a data exclusion criteria of a mean follow-up of 1 year or less. Unlike the WOSCOPS report which used rigorous and non-standard criteria for diabetes, such as high glucose 2.0 mmol/L above baseline, this meta-analysis used standard diabetes diagnostic criteria. For composite data, statin treatment group had a 9% increased probability of having incident diabetes. (95% CI 1.02 - 1.17). The study also showed that the probability of developing incident diabetes is higher among the oldest patient groups. The diabetogenic effect of statin treatment is one of the considerable factors for patients with major diabetic risk factors, yet the detrimental risk of the cardiovascular event far outweigh the trivial increase in the chance of gaining diabetes. The use of clinically proven, stable drug with its highly cost-effective cardiovascular disease treatment effect compared to other drugs confirms that despite its diabetogenic effects, statins should be used for patients with cardiovascular disease risk. However, Interaction between statin and major diabetic risk factor still remains in question. Further research should be conducted in this area to clearly state the diabetogenic effect of statin.

Reference

1. Sirtori CR, Ruscica M. Lipid-lowering drugs. The ESC Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. May 2006:204-209. doi:10.1093/med/9780198784906.003.0039.
2. Mora S, Ridker PM. Justification for the Use of Statins in Primary Prevention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating Rosuvastatin (JUPITER)—Can C-Reactive Protein Be Used to Target Statin Therapy in Primary Prevention? The American Journal of Cardiology. 2006;97(2):33-41. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2005.11.014.

. 3. Koenig W. Is hsCRP Back on Board? Implications from the JUPITER Trial. Clinical Chemistry. 2008;55(2):216-218. doi:10.1373/clinchem.2008.115915. 4. Robson J. Lipid modification: cardiovascular risk assessment and the modification of blood lipids for the primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Heart. 2007;94(10):1331-1332. doi:10.1136/hrt.2008.150979. 5.Reboussin DM, Allen NB, Griswold ME, et al. Systematic Review for the 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2018;138(17). doi:10.1161/cir.0000000000000601. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;71:e127-e248. 6. Sattar N, Preiss D, Murray HM, Welsh P, Buckley BM, de Craen AJ. Statins and risk of incident diabetes: a collaborative meta-analysis of randomised statin trials. Lancet 2010;375:735-42.
